New Entry: Java Threading (#853)
Codecademy/docs: content/java/concepts/threading/threading.md

---
Title: 'Threading'
Description: 'Threading is the ability for different parts of a program to run simultaneously.'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Classes'
  - 'Inheritance'
  - 'Interface'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

**Threading** is the ability for different parts of a program to run simultaneously. The currently running part of the program can start another process that will run in the background as the code that spawned the background process continues to execute. This allows complex processes to run without holding up the execution of the rest of the program.

> Different parts of the program that are operating at the same time are called "threads" and the code that started executing first, starting these other processes, is typically known as the "main thread".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Different parts of the program that are operating at the same time are called "threads" and the code that started executing first, starting these other processes, is typically known as the "main thread." The two ways that threads can be implemented in Java are either with [classes](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/classes) or with [interfaces](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/interfaces).
```

> One important thing to be aware of when working with threads is the possibility of concurrency problems, which happen when threads share access to a particular variable. If multiple threads access one variable, no thread can predict what its value will be since each thread operates independently and may be in a different stage in its process at any given time. Best practice is to avoid accessing such variables unless its confirmed that the threads that can modify them have completed their execution.

Reviewer: > If multiple threads access one variable, no thread can predict what its value will be since each thread operates independently and may be in a different stage in its process at any given time.

I'm curious, does this describe what a race condition is?

Author: @Dusch4593, I believe so.

> One important thing to be aware of when working with threads is the possibility of concurrency problems, which happen when threads share access to a particular variable. If multiple threads access one variable, no thread can predict what its value will be since each thread operates independently and may be in a different stage in its process at any given time. It is best practice to avoid accessing such variables unless it's confirmed that the threads that can modify them have completed their execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Race Conditions

Since Java supports running multiple threads at the same time, the risk of causing a concurrency problem, or a race condition, is always there. This happens when a particular [variable](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/variables) is being accessed and updated by many threads (which are running independently and may not be finished executing). Such variables should be avoided unless it's confirmed that the threads that can modify them have completed their execution.
```

This particular paragraph deserves its own header, I think.

> There are two ways of implementing threading in Java:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two ways that threads can be implemented in Java is either with [classes](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/classes) or with [interfaces](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/interfaces).
```

## Using the Thread Class

> The first way is by extending the `Thread` class and overriding its `.run()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first way is by extending the `Thread` class and overriding its `.run()` method:
```

### Syntax

> ```java

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```pseudo
```

> The two ways that threads can be implemented in Java are either with [classes](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/classes) or with [interfaces](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/interfaces).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This should be moved up with the text on line # 18.

> The first way is by extending the `Thread` class and overriding its `.run()` method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Threads can be defined in a class that extends the `Thread` class and overrides its `.run()` method:
```

public class MyThread extends Thread {
  public void run() {
    // Code to run in separate thread
  }
}
```

The code in the `.run()` method is what will run in a separate thread when the thread is started. The thread is started by creating an instance of this class and calling its `.start()` method:

```java
MyThread thread = new MyThread();
thread.start();
```

## Implementing the Runnable Interface

> The second way of using threads in java is to implement the `Runnable` interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second way of using threads is by implementing the `Runnable` interface:
```

### Syntax

> ```java

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```pseudo
```

> The second way of using threads is by implementing the `Runnable` interface:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way to create threads is by implementing the `Runnable` interface:
```

public class MyRunnable implements Runnable {
  public void run() {
    // Code to run in separate thread
  }
}
```

Again, the code in the `.run()` method is what will run in a separate thread when the thread is started. The thread is started by creating an instance of this class and passing it to the `Thread` class's constructor, then calling the `.start()` method on that instance of the `Thread` class.

```java
MyRunnable runnable = new MyRunnable();
Thread thread = new Thread(runnable);
thread.start()
```

In both cases the `.IsAlive()` method of the `Thread` class will return a boolean that is `true` as long as the thread is running.

## Example

> This example prints out some messages from the main thread and from a separate thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example prints out some messages from the main thread and from a separate thread:
```

> In both cases, the `.IsAlive()` method of the `Thread` class will return a boolean that is `true` as long as the thread is running.

Reviewer: Two questions:

- Is it supposed to be `.isAlive()` instead of `.IsAlive()`?
- Should we include the usage of the `.isAlive()` method in the code snippet?

> This example prints out some messages from the main thread and from a separate thread:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example prints out some messages from both the main thread and a separate thread:
```

```java
public class Example extends Thread {

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    Example thread = new Example();
    System.out.println("This is the main thread.");
    thread.start();
    System.out.println("This is the main thread.");
  }

  public void run() {
    System.out.println("This is a separate thread.");
    System.out.println("This is a separate thread.");
  }
}
```

> This results in output like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This results in output like the following:
```
